Fertlisation in a large number of animals is internal. This ensures that the sperm are correctly deposited in the females reproductive tract. Human sperm remain are only viable for 48 hours. This means that the sperm have to reach the oviducts as fast as possible. The sperm will meet a secondary oocyte in the oviduct as the oocyte makes it's way from the ovaries to the uterus provided that ovulation has occurred recently. Eggs also 'expire' and the oocyte will die 24 hours after release if it remains unfertilised.

Several thousand sperm cells will surround the secondary oocyte but only one will penetrate through the follicle cells and the clear outer membrane known as the zona pellida. For sperm to fertilise the egg they must first go through capacitation. Capacitation is a process which changes the membrane covering the acrosome and can take many hours.

Once the sperm comes into contact with the secondary oocyte and comes into contact with the zona pelucida the acrosome membrane is ruptured and enzymes are released. These enzymes act to soften the cells around the oocyte. When the acrosome becomes inverted it becomes needle thin. This allows the sperm to penetrate the now softened cells. This entire process is known as the acrosome reaction.

As the sperm penetrates the egg reactions are triggered in the oocyte that cause the formation of the fertilisation membrane. It is this membrane which prevents further entry by other sperm cells. The oocyte (nucleus) also completes its second meiotic division at this point. The two nuclei then fuse to form the diploid nucleus of the zygote.

The newly formed zygote devides by mitosis until it is a hollow ball of cells called the blastocyst. Travelling down the fallopian tube the zygote is continuously developing - after three days it reaches the nucleus and embeds itself in the endometrium. This point is called implantation.

The blastocyst which is now implanted in the endometrium of the nucleus consists of an outer layer called the trophoblast. The trophoblast will eventually develop into the chorion and amnion, two further membranes. The chorion will grow chorionic villi which allow for more absorption of nutrients from the wall of the uterus as a result of the increased surface area. hCG is also secreted by the chorion. Human chorionic gonadotrophin prevents the degeneration of the corpus luteum. The corpus luteum itself is formed from the Graffian follicle after the ovum has been released. Detecting this hormone is the basis for pregnancy tests. The chorionic villi also later become attached to the developing foetus through its umbilical cord as the placenta.