Meiosis is the form of cell division which takes place in the reproductive organs of animals and plants. The resulting gametes produced in this process are haploid unlike mitosis which produces diploid cells. This is important in sexual reproduction beacuse it allows for genetic variation to occur.
The first step in the meiosis process is called Meiosis 1. In meiosis 1 a pair of chromosomes (maternal and paternal) which have identical gene locations (loci) i.e. a homologous pair which code for the same features of an organism pair up. After they have paired up the chromatids of each chromasome wrap around each other and exchange in a process known as crossing over. After crossing over has occured one chromosome from each pair is made into one daughter cell. Because of this step of 'halving' the daghter cells have only half the required genetic material and so are haploid.
These newly produced haploid nuclei divide again in meiosis two which is a process identical to mitosis. After this step there is a total of four haploid nuclei which each have a differing genetic composition.
Once the cell has stopped dividing it is in interphase and the DNA present in the cell doubles in quantity and new organelles are formed.

Both meiosis one and two can be further split into phases. These phases are Phophase 1 & 2, Metaphase 1 & 2, Anaphase 1 & 2 and Telophase 1 & 2. The 1 phases occur during meiosis 1 and the 2 phases occur in meisosis 2.

Prophase 1 is where the chromasomes become shorter as well as thicker. They also split into two chromatids. If centrioles are also present in the cell they move to the poles of the cell at this point. Microtubules then extend from the centrioles formin asters which make up the spindle. Once prophase has completed the nuclear membrane breaks down and the nucleolus completely dissapears.
The folllowing phase is Metpahse 1. In this stage the pairs of homologous chromasomes are lined up on the equator of the spindle in a random manner. This random alignement produces an independant assortment of chromosomes which in turn creates brand new genetic combinations.
After Metaphase 1 is Anaphase 1. Here the chromosomes wich make up each bivalent seperate and one of each pair is pulled to a seperate pole whilst its sister chromosome is pulled in the opposite direction. Because of the pairs being pulled in opposite directions and their random arrangement during metaphase each pole gets just one of the pair.
The result of this phase is a mixture of maternal and paternal chromasomes and is called independant assortment. At completion of anaphase the chromosomes have reached opposite poles and the nuclear evelope as reformed around the chromosome groups.
The final phase of meiosis 1 is Telophase 1. More often than not the chromosomes remain condensed and meisis 2 occurs straight after completion of meiosis 1 as in plants where it occurs with no re-formation of the spindle. Unlike plants animal cells undergo cytokinesis at this point - the division of the cytoplasm to form two haploid cells.

Meiosis 2 has the same processes as meiosis 1. In prophase 2 the new spindle develops at a right angle to the previous (now old) spindle. Metaphase 2 sees the chromosomes line up sperately on the equator of this new spindle each chromosome attached to a spindle by its centromere. During anaphase 2 these centromeres divide pulling the chromatids to opposite ends of the cell.
The final step of the entire process is telophase 2. This occurs when the chromatids reach the poles. Here they lenghthen and the spindle dissapears as the nuclear membrane is re-formed. Cytokeisis then occurs to end the process producing four haploid daughter cells each with a different genetic code.