When a cell divides it is important that the offspring have an exact copy of the genetic material in the parent cell. This means that Chromosomes in the parent cell must make exact copies of themselves - this takes place during interphase.
To carry out DNA replication the hydrogen bonds holding together the nitrogenous base 'steps' of the DNA break. Once this has occurred to two separate parts of the DNA molecule separate further. As this separation happens the DNA unwinds. Each strand of the DNA is a template (like an engineers blueprint for making an exact copy) for its complementary strand i.e. its opposite. Free nucleotides from the cytoplasm are added to these exposed strands in a reaction that is catalysed by DNA polymerase.
This forms two DNA molecules each with a fresh chain of nucleotides but also with a strand of the original DNA molecule. Because of this mixture between new and old parts of DNA this process is referred to as 'semi conservative replication'.
The semi conservative replication hypothesis was confirmed using an experiment which used E. coli bacteria and different isotopes of the element nitrogen.
The bacteria E. Coli was first cultured over many generations in a nutrient media containing the heavy isotope of nitrogen N15 within the supplied amino acids. This N15 was then incorporated into the bacteria DNA through its nucleotides. After a number of generations all the DNA contained the heavier N15 isotope. To confirm this the bacteria had their DNA extracted and ran through an ultra-centrifuge. An ultra-centrifuge rotates centrifuge tubes containing suspensions at high speed causing denser particles to separate out of the tube at a lower point. In this case the heavy N15 caused the DNA to settle at a low point in the tube.
The bacteria were then transferred to another medium this one containing the isotope of nitrogen N14 which is lighter than the N15 form. The bacteria were also allowed to divide in this medium. These bacteria also had their DNA extracted after the first and second generations.
The first generation of bacteria cultured on the N14 medium had mid density DNA due to the heavy N15 strand and the new lighter N14 strand. The second generation of bacteria on the other hand had low density DNA which settled at the top of the suspension after passing through the centrifuge. This was because the new DNA strands were made from the light N14 isotope. This difference in the density of each DNA molecule is the evidence for the semi conservative hypothesis.