The ribosome which the mRNA molecule reaches is formed from two smaller sub units. A small sub unit which has two sites for attachments of tRNA (so only two molecules of tRNA can be associated with a ribosome at any one time) and a large sub unit.
The ribosome first attaches to the start codon on the mRNA molecule which is denoted by the codon AUG. Reading this codon causes a tRNA molecule with a complementary anticodon to become attached to the ribosome. It also causes another tRNA molecule with the complementary anticodon for the next triplet code in the mRNA to become attached to the ribosome. This brings the two amino acids on the tRNA molecules into a close enough proximity that a peptide bond can form between them (a ribosomal enzyme catalyses this bond formation). The first of the tRNA molecules then leaves the ribosome leaving a free attachments site for another tRNA molecule. As this happens the ribosome moves along the mRNA strand one codon. The above process then repeats until a STOP codon is reached.
Translation therefore allows amino acids to be built into polypeptides as specified in the DNA that is found in the nucleus of that cell. Each time a single ribosome moves along a mRNA molecule one polypeptide is produced but usually a number of ribosomes can be found on the same mRNA molecule resulting in many polypeptides being formed. This is called a polysome system.
These polypeptides may need more 'work' to become proteins for that reason they often travel to the Golgi body where they are formed into the other levels of protein structure (secondary, tertiary etc).