A pest is any organisms which competes with or adversly affects a population of organisms that are important economically. These pests are usually fought with pesticides, these are chemicals which are used to control organisms which spread disease such as mosquitos or those which damage farmers crops.

When pests attack crops and animals the result is a reduction in yeild and a devistating economic loss to the farmer whose crops or animals were attacked. These pests are constantly competing with crop organisms for resources and can cause desease in 'helpful' organisms which usually live on the crop. They often make infection through pathogens more likely and can spoil food which is in transit or whilst the food is in storage. 

If a pest is causing a large amount of because it is present in very large numbers then it is worth the farmers while to spend money on controlling the pest.

When controlling pests either of chemical or biological control can be used. Chemical control is the use of pesticides or insecticides which are designed to kill insects (or less commonly herbicides and fungicides) , this method has both its advantages and disadvantages. 

The advantages of chemical control are that it is very effective - the pests population is controlled very quickly and at a comparitively low cost. It can also be applied on a small scale such as just one of the farmers fields. The chemicals can be sprayed onto the crop or applied as smokes in enclosed areas, even powders. The chemicals can also be applied to animals by being added to animal feed or sprayed directly onto the animal itself. None of these application methods require a high level of skill or understanding, another advantage.

There are a number of disadvantes as well. A big problem when using pesticides is that the pest you are attempting to control can become resistant to the pesticide. This is where the organism becomes able to survive a dose of the chemical which would under normal conditions be lethal. Over exposure the these chemicals can also be hazardous to humans as well. Generally the chemicals which are used as pesticides are not specific enough and therfore can also kill off 'helpful' insects such as bees. They can also kill fish, birds and mamals by contamination of the food chain.

Likewise the use of biological controls where the interspecific competition between a predator and it's prey is used to control the pest population also has advantages and disadvantages.

Firstly biological control can repair some of the damage done by chemical control methods such as allowing a resurgence of 'helpgul' species. They are also usually highly specific to one pest (with the notable exception of the cane toad). In order to work correctly biological control methods must target one pest and not do any other damage to the ecosystem. Unlike chemical control biological control can also provide a long term pest control solution provided that a population equilibreum becomes established. This makes them suited to a wide range of environments including greenhouses (glasshouses). However unlike chemical control biological methods have high initial reasearch cost so in the short term is an expensive solution though it becomes cheaper as time passes.

The cost of biological control is also a disadvantage because of the frequent input needed to attain a balance and the high level of skill and knowledge required - such as knowing the detailed knowledge of the pests life cycle. This is due to the potential to release an organism (like the cane toad) which can itself become a pest after it exhausts its food supply or causes damage to the ecosystem. Because of this there are only a few success stories and we do not know the control agent for a large number of our existing pest problems.

Biological controls are also currently of litte use to individuals except for in greenhouse/glasshouse scenarios because biological control introduction needs to be carried out on a large scale.

Biological controls work because the abundance of prey is a factor limiting the number of its predators, in a given food chain the predator-prey relationship causes the population of both predator and prey to vary. We have been making use of this relationship to control pests. A benificial organism is released as a predator to the undesirable pest. The aim of biological control is to reduce the pest population to a sensible level at which they no longer cause any economic damage. Sometime insect parasites are used and sometimes microorganisms are used. Pests have always been regulated by their natural predators (they can have several) however through farming we have upset the system e.g. by creating large fields and removing hedges which reduced or in some cases removes the natural habitat for predators.

Due to both methods having a number of advantages and disadvantages it is often considered that the best solution is to use a combination of biological and chemical control even though there have been some improvement in chemical pesticides like pyrethroids and organophosphates. These combined methods include producing pest resistant crops, chainging cultivation techniques and the use of highly targeted chemicals. Such a solution is often refered to as an integrated pest control solution.

