At any time, for any population the size of the population is found from the birth rate and death rate (though also organisms can immigrate into the population or emmigrate out).

When a species encouters an area which it can colonise it grows following the S shaped curve which is typical for any new species. The S shape is caused by three components of the population growth. The first is the lag phase - when a species first starts to colonise an area there are few individuals so growth is slow and the organisms must adapt and prepate to grow for example by synthesising enzymes and other metabolic activity. Following the lag phase is the exponential phase. The exponential phase occurs as the populations number increases and as long as their is no factor which might limit population growth more and more of the population starts to reproduce this causes the popultion to grown exponentially like an e^x graph - though this can not be continued forever. Eventually the population has to stop growing, when it does it enters the stationary phase. During this phase the number of births is equal to the number of deaths and the population has reached its largest possible size. The largest size population can reach in an environment is known as the carrying capacity of that environment. After the stationary phase is the death phase, this is when the death rate is greater than the birth rate - it usually occurs when all the food has been used up.

The environment can also 'resist' population growth. This resistance includes a number of factors which affect population size such as disease, the weather or the build up of toxic waste. All of these factors slow down poulation growth.

Some factors may also cause the population to 'crash' such as density independant factors which affect all the organisms in an environment regardless of the population size. These effects are usually caused by a sudden change in an abiotic factor like the breakout of a wildfire. Other factors are those which are density dependant and whose effect increases along with the size of the population. One such example of this is the loss of a food supply. The carrying capacity of the environment as mentioned above is caused by density dependnt factors.

Naturally populaton sizes vary rather than remain constant. Whilst these variations are not often large and do not occur at random intervals then the population size of a species remains close to an equilibreum position - this is the carrying capacity of the environment and if the populations numbers increase above this value then a density dependant factor acts to limit the population growth either by increasing the death rate or reducing breeding rate. When the population falls back below the equilibreum position the density dependatn factor no longer affects the growth rate allowing the number to increse once again. Population variations usually occur in line with another pattern such as the season cycle (Spring - Summber - Autumn - Winter) or amount of rainfall. Therefore it is said that population variation is a process regulated by negative feedback.

Negative feedback is where a monitored variable changes causing a reponse to be triggered and the result of the response counteracts the action which first affected the monitored variable.
