Some drugs can cause an increase in activity at the synapses. Often these drugs pretend to be naturally occurring neurotransmitters. For example a drug shaped like acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter in humans and other animals would effect the postsynaptic membrane in the same way as acetylcholine does (causing sodium ligend-gated channels to open). Other times drugs inhibit the enzymes which usually break down the neurotransmitter e.g. acetylcholinesterase.

Drugs affecting the nervous system can be classified as one of two types, excitory or inhibitory. Drugs which affect the central nervous system are referred to as Psychoactive drugs. This is because the alter brain functionality and can often change a persons mood and behaviour. There are many psychoactive drugs and they are for the most part, illegal e.g cannabis, ecstasy, heroine and cocaine. Originally many psychoactive drugs were developed for medicinal purposes, cannabis for example.

Excitory Drugs are those which cause an increase in the number of action potentials in the postsynaptic membrane whilst inhibitory drugs are those which reduce the number of action potentials that occur. 

Continuing with the acetylcholine example - there are insecticides containing organophosphate compounds (some of which are now banned in the UK) which block the neurotransmitter break-down enzyme after they bind with the receptors of the post synaptic membrane this makes the neurotransmitter last far longer than it would normally. Other organophosphate compounds like Sarin are used as chemical weapons because of their nerve agent properties. In humans preventing the action of cholinesterase causes the acetylcholine molecules to remain in the synaptic cleft resulting in repeated action potentials in the postsynaptic neurone. If this occurs at a neuromuscular junction then the muscle undergoes repeated contractions.