Where neurones meet there are often chemical synapses. The purpose of the synapses is to transmit action potentials between neurones. Synapses along with the refractory period ensure that the nervous impulse can only travel in one direction. The impulse can only travel in one direction because the synaptic vesicles containing the neurotransmitter are only found in the presynaptic knob and the corresponding receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. Synapses also serve two other important purposes - protection of the nervous system from overstimulation and to filter out low level stimuli. The nervous system is protected from overstimulation because of the time taken for the neurotransmitter to be regenerated, if synapse is repeatedly stimulated the neurotransmitter will run out - preventing the impulse from crossing the synapse and so preventing a response.

The gap of a synapse, or the size of the synaptic cleft is approximately 20 micro meters across. When the action potential reaches the synaptic knob it causes voltage gated calcium channels to open. This causes Calcium ions to enter the cell and activate enzymes which move the synaptic vesicles containing the neurotransmitter to the presynaptic membrane where they fuse releasing the neurotransmitter in to the synaptic cleft. The neurotransmitter diffuses across the space and binds with receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. These receptors are ligend gated channels which open and cause sodium ions to enter the postsynaptic membrane. This in turn depolarises the cell, triggering the action potential again in the new neurone (as in sensory neurones the action potential is only restarted if the membrane becomes depolarised enough).

The neurotransmitter (e.g. Acetylcholine) is removed by enzymes in the synaptic cleft, this helps to prevent nerve impulses from 'colliding'. If too little of the neurotransmitter is released then the postsynaptic membrane is not stimulated and the action potential stops at the synapse. When acetylcholine is broken down it becomes ethanoic acid and choline. These molecules can diffuse across the presynaptic membrane to form Acetylcholine. This is a process which requires ATP - not only for regenerating the neurotransmitter but also for storing it back into vesicles.
