Population sizes are limited by the environment of the organism. As a population grows in size environmental factors act to keep the size of the population relatively small. This is a factor in the fact that often organisms do not reproduce to grow their population size even through the have the (reproductive) potential to do so.

There are only finite resources in an environment so organisms have to compete both among their species and with other species for resources. These resources include food, shelter, mates, light, space etc. Competition that occurs between members of the same species is intra specific competition, it is this competition that is the foundation of speciation through natural selection. Inter specific competition on the other hand is competition that occurs between individuals in different species. For example a predator - prey relationship.

Competition is a form of selection pressure. In predator - prey relationships for example predation causes an increase in the fitness (as in 'survival of the fittest') of the prey by changing the frequency of alleles in a population.

Organisms which are better adapted to their surroundings and environment survive to breed. This means that they pass their alleles on to the next generation. Less well adapted individuals are 'eliminated from the gene pool' because their characteristics are not passed on to the next generation. The gene pool is the number of alleles present in a population at a given time and is determined by selection pressures exerted by the environment.

For a population that reproduces sexually the gene pool is large because of the large amount of variation present. To determine the proportion of occurrences of different genotypes in a population and so the proportions of alleles (allele frequency) population genetics is used.

The gene pool of a population is constantly changing. Some alleles grow to be more frequent whilst others less so. In some cases one or more alleles may be completely removed from the population. A gene pool is only as stable as the environment. A stable environment creates a stable gene pool but variations in the environment favour different alleles in different ways creating changes in the frequency of alleles in a population and so also in the gene pool.

A stable gene pool is known as 'genetic equilibrium'. Genetic drift, natural selection and mutations are factors which act on the genetic equilibrium and alter the gene pool.

Of these factors genetic drift is perhaps the most important for all populations though it has greater importance in populations that are small in size or are isolated. Genetic drift is most important in small populations because the smaller the population the smaller number of individuals that may be carrying the allele and so the greater chance of those individuals not mating and passing the allele on to the next generation - possibly causing it to be lost from the gene pool. Genetic drift is also important in the formation of new species. When some individuals of a population become isolated the small population undergoes genetic drift which can make it greatly different in comparison with the original species (the parental population). This effect is known as the founder effect and is best demonstrated by Darwin's finches.