If a mutagen causes cancer it is called a carcinogen. Like other mutagens carcinogens affect the DNA in cells through mutations. Mutations in somatic (body) cells more often than not have no effect on the body because they are dispatched by the immune system. It is important to note that not all mutagens are carcinogens but all carcinogens are mutagens.

It is thought that the formation of a tumour begins with mutations in the genes which regulate cell division. These genes are proto-oncogenes and the point mutations that occur within them are sometimes unnoticed by the immune system leading to uncontrolled mitosis. Eventually the unchecked cell division forms a ball of cells which is called a tumour. Often tumours are benign, that is they are harmless and do not move from their site of formation. On the other hand some tumours are dangerous - these are malignant tumours. Malignant tumours spread through the blood and lymph as a result of cells 'breaking off' from the main tumour body. These cells can invade other tissue leading to secondary growths. This is called metastasis and the diseases that result are called cancers.

Tobacco smoke is a good example of a carcinogen though it is the chemicals found withing the smoke that are in fact carcinogenic. Nicotine and Carbon monoxide are amongst the harmful chemcicals present. Tar which solidifies in the lungs contains many carchinogens which affect the DNA of cells in the alveoli. Oncognes (mutated genes which cause cancer) and bad suppressor genes cab both lead to lung cancer. This means tar causes 25% of all cancer deaths in developed countries.