All living organisms have genotype which describes the genetics of that particular organism including the alleles or alternative gene forms that it contains. Linked to the genotype of an organism is the phenotype of that organism. The phenotype is the set of observable characteristics an organisms posseses as a result of its genotype. Genes are sections of DNA which code for a particular polypeptide to be used in protein synthesis. Genes are located on chromosomes. Homologous chromosomes are chromosomes which share the same length, centromere position and other properties. Alleles have similar gene loci on these homologous pairs. Genes are inherited and can determine particular characteristics. For a given chrosome locus there are a possible 3 allele combinations for a specific characteristic. The first is heterozygous, having two different alleles for a gene - one dominant and one recessive. In this case each allele will be present on a different chromosome of the homologous pair. Homozygous dominant is the second allele combination. In this case the organism will have the same two dominant aleles present which express the dominant characteristic in the individual. The 'opposite' of this is the homozygous recessive combination whereby the organism has two recessive alleles for the same gene which cause the recessive characteristic to be expressed in the individual.

If an particular chracteristic is controlled by a single gene then the organism will express the dominant characteristic unless they are homozygous recessive in which case the organism will express the recessive characteristic.
