Any change to an organims DNA is a mutation. Mutations may be localised to one gene or may effect many genes, even the whole chromosome. Mutations are very rare because they occur randomly and in a spontaneous manner which results in a low mutation rate in a population. Whilst the variation caused by mutation can impact evolution because it provides characterisitcs on which natural selection pressures can act they do not have as much impact as other variation sources such as independant assortment.

The organisms which are most affected by mutations are those which have relativley breif lives. This is because as a species/population they undergo meiosis much more frequently than long lived organisms increasing both the chance that mutations occur and the overall mutation rate.

Mutations occur of their own accord but the mutation rate can be increased by exposure to mutagens. These are agents which cause mutations. Examples of mutagens include Ionising radiation (X-rays, UV, gamma), Viruses such as HPV, Chemicals such as tar in cigerettes. As well as these mutagens some mutations are linked to hereditary predisposition in which an organism inherits the tendency to have a particular mutation occur.

Some mutations can cause cancer, in this case they are called carcinogens. All carcinogens are mutagens but not all mutagens are carcinogens. Mutations occur in one of two ways: Incorrect copying of DNA and Chromosome damage. If DNA is not correctly replicated before cell division it can result in new faulty chromosomes. These mutations are often confined to one gene so are known as point mutations (sometimes as gene mutations). Note though that only mutations like these that occur in gamete formation have the chance to be inherited by offspring. Chromosome damage is usually reversible, the DNA that is broken will rejoin should the chromosme break. On occasion however the chromosomes may not repair themselves correctly - this is a cause of chromosome mutation and has serious consequences because it affects a large number of genes.

Point mutations can cause changes in the phenotype of an organism. When a point mutation occurs a different allele is produced. The point mutation can take the form of an addition, deletion, duplication, inversion or substitution. All of thse mutations change the polypeptide produced in protein synthesis by changing the primary structure of the protein becase if the modified amino acid which is built into the chain.

As well as gene mutations there are also chromosome mutations. Chromosome mutations are responsible for variation in the number of chromosomes found in cells as well as their structure. Chromosome mutations are most likely to occur during meiosis.

Changes in the structure of the chromosome that occur during prophase one are such an example. When the homologous chromosomes pair up and crossing over occurs they exchange in material may result in the wrong peices being rejoined - this causes a completely different gene sequence and prevents pairing up from occuring in meiosis again. As well as changes in the structure of the chromosome they can also vary in number. Non-disjunction is an example of this. Non-disjunction is a procees in which the chromosomes do not seperate resulting in one daughter cell with no copies of that pair and one with two copies of the homologous pair.

Down syndrome is an example of chromosome mutation. Trisomy 21 is the most common form of Down's syndrome and is caused by non disjunction of chromosome 21.

Sometimes more than one chromosome is affected. Mutations in entire sets of chromosomes is known as polyploidy. If a diploid gamete (produced by meiotic error) is fertilised by a haploid gamete then the resulting zygote is triploid (it has three sets of chromosomes). If both gametes are diploid then a tetraploid is produced. Polyploidy like this is common in flowering plants (angiosperms like tomatoes and wheat) because it has some benefits for the plant but it can also be caused in animals when during mitosis the two chromosome sets (one from each haploid gamete) duplicate but are not then seperated. When triploids are produced they are usually sterile becuase their chromosomes cannot match up into homologous pairs.

Although the term mutations has negative connotations they can in fact be beneficial. Benecficial mutations however are very rare. When they do occur though they provide a selective advantage to the organism increasing the amount of discontinuous variation in the population. Mutated genes however are often recessive alleles. As a result of this they have to be replicated in the gene pool a significant number of times over many generations so that the chance of an offspring having both recessive alleles and expressing the characteristics is large enough that it occurs with relative frequency.