There are a number of ways in which animals can be cloned. Of these methods - Embryo cloning is perhaps the simplest. Embryo cloning has been used to produce organisms which are genetically identical and allow farmers to increase the numbers of their animals. It is carried out by taking eggs from the animal with the desired quality for example cows which produce the most milk. The eggs are then fertilised in vitro with the sperm of the best male animal. The newly fertilised egg subsequently divides into a ball of cells. When this ball consists of 16 cells it is split up into smaller bundles which each develop into more genetically identical clones. These clones are identical to each other not to the parent similar to identical twins which form in the same way. The embryos are transplanted into surrogates to complete gestation before they are born.

The 16 cell limit is important because at this point the cells are totipotent, they can divide into a number of different types of cell such as the complete organism but after this stage the cells differentiate and can no longer be used to produce complete organisms.

Another commonly used but more complex cloning method is cloning by nuclear transplant. Unlike the embryo cloning method which produces genetically identical offspring a la twins this method produces individuals that are genetically identical to the organism that you want to clone. The technique involves transplanting a nucleus from a somatic cell (a body cell) into a 'blank' egg which is an egg with the nucleus removed. Dolly the sheep is an example of an animal cloned in this manner.

Dolly was cloned in the following way, similar steps apply to other animals.
Cells were taken from the udder of the sheep (the donor that you want to clone). Another sheep who is 'the recipient' has their eggs taken and the nucleus removed leaving other cell organelles intact. Removing the nucleus still leaves mitochondrial DNA in the cell. The donor nucleus and this cell are fused in vitro using a gentle electric pulse which stimulates some of the reactions which occur in fertilisation. This forms a ball of cells which is the developing embryo and is transplanted into a surrogate or 'the host' to complete gestation. When the lamb is born it is genetically identical to the donor sheep though it has mitochondrial DNA from the recipient. This cloning technique is not as useful as embryo cloning because it does not allow a large quantity of animal copies to be produced. Instead this technique is used to preserve desirable qualities for future generations. For example in castrated race horses who cannot produce sperm (obviously) in order to maintain their genetic material they have to be cloned. Cloning is used when artificial selection would be too slow or would cause a loss of the characteristic. Cloning has many applications and is not limited to big organisms like animals, cancer cells can be cloned for medical research or for cloning antibodies that are used on pregnancy tests. The overall goal of cloning is to maintain a line of cells with desirable characteristics for as long as required to maintain genetic stock and biodiversity.

There are a few disadvantages to cloning in animals. The most obvious of these is expense, cloning requires lab time and labour which is very costly considering how unreliable the entire procedure is. Further without closely analysing the genetics of the animal that is being cloned scientists may select for bad alleles by accident. The final disadvantage that may have been shown in dolly the sheep is premature ageing, Dolly's telemeters were short on examination a usual result of the ageing process although Dolly was young, only 6 when she died. Along with this other unforeseen and long term effects may develop in progeny of cloning.