5 in 1000 people in the U.K. alone will suffer from Cystic fibrosis as a result of a defective autosomal allele. Since the allele is recessive it requires two carriers to cause expression of the condition in offspring. This is hard to test which is why genetic screening is sometimes used. Sufferers produce a thick mucus from the epithelial cells of a number of passageways including the lungs and pancreas. The mucus arises because the CTFR protein (cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator) in sufferers does not transport chloride ions out of the cell. This is because of a three base deletion on chromosome 7 that leads to a missing amino acid. In normal circumstances the transport of chloride ions draw water out of the cell by osmosis into the layer of dust and so on which forms the mucus. This makes the mucus watery so it can be easily brushed away by cilia on the cell surface. When chloride ions are not transported, as in sufferers the mucus dries out and can not be moved by the cilia - this makes the individual prone to infection which is especially serious in the lungs. Many suffers do not live past their late 20s.

In order to relieve the symptoms of respiratory distress a frequent physiotherapy is required to keep the airways open. Because the condition also affects the pancreas sufferers can digest less, as a result children have large appetites to compensate. Research being carried out currently is looking at ways that gene therapy can be used to alleviate or stop symptoms. The CTFR gene has been isolated and clones multiple times. Currently the gene therapy uses liposomes - small spheres of lipid molecules as a vector to transfer the correct gene to the affected cells. This is not the best method as liposomes have a low chance of being taken in and the DNA being combined with the cell. They are however easy to administer, inhalers can be used to deliver the liposomes to the lungs. In the future viruses from the adeno-associated group may be improved (they have been trailed before) to be used in gene therapy, currently as with the adenovirus they have a low success rate.
