Everyone's DNA is unique - excluding clones, identical twins and people who against almost unbeatable odds have ended up with the same DNA has another human being. This means that we can inspect a persons DNA to identify them, an individuals DNA profile used in this way is a genetic fingerprint and the process of obtaining such a fingerprint is genetic fingerprinting. Genetic fingerprinting is used in a number of scenarios including paternity cases and in other forensic tasks aka tasks relating to the investigation of crime or of interest to a court of law.

90% of our entire genome has no known function though different people still have different sequences of 'useless' DNA. The non coding sequences in DNA are often repeated many times consisting of up to 40 base pairs and usually more than 20. These lengths of DNA are called HVRs or hyper-variable regions or even STRs, short tandem repeats. Like the rest of DNA they are passed on from parent to offspring and the number of repeats in the lengths of the non coding DNA can be used to identify and individual.

To produce a genetic fingerprint a technique called gel electrophoresis is used (sometimes simply referred 
to as electrophoresis). Electrophoresis is exposing DNA to an electric current in a gel medium through 
which different fragments of the DNA travel depending on their size. The process is analogous to 
chromatography. 
The DNA has to first be extracted from the individual and cut into smaller fragments, this is done with an enzyme called restriction endonuclease. The fragments are then transferred to the gel and the current switched on. Because the DNA fragments are negatively charged they move towards the positive end of the gel with smaller fragments moving further to the positive end. This produces a series of bands which are positioned according to the size of the fragments. The gel trough is then covered with e nylon membrane onto with the fragments are transferred whilst they maintain their position. The process by which the fragments are transferred is known as Southern blotting. Southern blotting is named after Sir Edwin Mellor Southern a British biologist who invented the technique relatively recently in a 5 November 1975 paper entitled "Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments separated by gel electrophoresis". Chemiluminescent probes or (though now rarely used) radioactive probes are attached to the nylon and to specific parts of the fragments. Any fragments which remain unbound after this process are simply washed away. The nylon is then placed in chemicals which trigger chemiluminescence or in the case of radioactive probes under X-RAY film causing the probes to expose the film. The pattern (or autoradiograph) captured from this is a pattern of dark and light bands which are unique to that individual. This is the genetic fingerprint of that person.

Because the band pattern is inherited from both parents it is used in paternity cases by taking DNA from the white blood cells of the mother, (possible) father and child. Removing the mother bands from the child pattern leaves the pattern that should be in the fathers fingerprint. These are compared to determine if the individual concerned is actually the father. This is a favourite technique of ITV's The Jeremy Kyle show and causes much controversy.
