Genetic engineering is deliberately modifying an organism by manipulating its genetic material to produce the required characteristics. This can range from modifying bacteria to produce drugs to 'building' pest resistant crops. Genetic egineering is carried out through recombinant DNA technology. Human insulin production by the bacteria E.coli or yeast is an example of large scale genetic engineering.

To begin the process of genetically engineered molecule production the gene which codes for that molecule to be produced has to be isolated from the donor DNA molecule. This is done using a gene probe. In some cases it is the mRNA that is isolated from the celss. In this case DNA is made from the mRNA template using reverse transcriptase and enzyme taken from viruses. After this both methods continue in the same manner. The DNA is cut into segments using restriction enzymes (restriction endonuclease) which 'cut' the DNA at recognised base pairings. At the end of the new DNA strand are sticky ends which are unpaired bases later used to join the DNA to the vector.

Once the DNA has been isolated it has to be inserted into a vector for delivery into the bacteria. The vector used most commonly is a plasmid. Plasmids are small circular pieces of DNA which are found in bacteria. The plasmids first have to be taken from other bacteria by dissolving the cell wall and taking the plasmid. This plasmid is then cut open using the same restriction enzyme that is used in the cutting of the human or animal gene which codes for the molecule we want to make. This ensures that the bases on the sticky ends are complimentary so that when mixed the plasmid and the gene recombine. DNA ligases are the enzymes used to join the donor DNA and vector DNA (the plasmid) together through creating phosphodiester bonds in the sugar phosphate backbone of the DNA. Hydrogen bonds form naturally between the complementary bases on the sticky ends. The DNA produced as a result of these steps is called recombinant DNA.

Once scientists have optained the plasmid it can be reinserted into the bacteria to produce more copies of the plasmid. These bacteria are then comercially cultured for example in a batch culture (or otherwise) fermenter. The molecule that was aimed to be produce is then collected and purified from the fermenter. This is relatively cheap and quick in comparison with other methods such as producing insulin from cows.

Only 1% of the bacteria however take up the plasmid to it becomes difficult to identify which bacteria need to be used in the fermentation process. To solve this problem marker genes are used. Marker genes used in this way are to indentify genetically engineered bacteria using antibiotic resistance. Marker genes can however be used to indentify labelled genes to show they have been incorporated into the host cell. This is often done by making the marker radioactive. When genetically engineered cells are grown in the lab they are grown on plates laced with ampicillin, a largely useless antibiotic. Because the bacteria that have the donor DNA have also had the marker gene - in this case resistance to the ampicillin also inserted they survive on the plates whilst the others to not. This allows sceintists to easilly see which bacteria have the plasmid and can be cultured for fermenting.
