Couples whose families have a history of gentic defects may consult a genetic counsellor for advice on the risk that any child they bear wil suffer fromt the defect even if they themselves are unaffected. The risk  of bearing a child which has the genetic defect is based on the family history along with other factors like how closely the parents are related and the general occurence of the gene in the population - locally and globally.

If the risk is sufficently large the couple may choose not to have a child themselves (opting instead for adoption etc). However some couples may still choose to conceive despite the risk. Couples which do this can still choose to have an abortion subject to legal requirements if the condition is discovered in the unborn child. This is called genetic screening and involves several methods which can be used to test for a genetic defect. Not all are 100% accurate which raises some ethical issues. The methods that might be employed include blood tests such as the one for cystic fibrosis. There are other tests which are more invasive, time consuming and labour intensive. These include Chorionic villus sampling which can only be carried out between 8 and 10 weeks into the pregnancy. Chorionic villus sampling requres taking foetal tissue from the uterus to be cultured so that they can later be examined under a microscope to look for defects. Ammiocentis is another more involved procedure - it involves withdrawing some amniotic fluid. The withdrawn fluid contains cells which have 'floated' from the surface of the embryo. As with chrionic villus sampling these cells can be taken from the fluid and examined under a microscope.

Though the advantages of gene theapy, counselling and screening are large, giving a child a chance to lead a normal life for example there are people who are against the notion of using genetic screening and so on. People for example feel that genetic screening is an invasion of privacy despite the fact that it can only be carried out with consent. Further it puts a large amount of pressure on couples who discover they are 'high risk' and so must decide if they can raise a child with a genetic disease. Some are scared that scarce regulation will lead to companies modifying the genetics of the child before it is born. But is this a bad thing?
