Whilst there are numerous advantages to genetic engineering including the medcinal benefits, high yield crop production (possibly preventing famine) and producing increasingly needed polypeptides (incl. proteins) the could not be made with any other means at our disposal there are also some concerns which offset the benefits. These concerns range from privacy issues to general hazards associated with the procedures carried out as part of genetic engineering.

As sceintists gather ever increasing amounts of data epecially related to genetic fingerprinting concerns are being reaise over how safe the data is. Apart from normal scientific use cases, forensics, paternaty studies etc the data could be obtained by insurance companies to determine the premiums they charge. This could for some people make getting life insurance impossible. For this reason its important that the data collected through sceintific studies is appropriately regulated and controlled.

Genetic engineering provides other possibilities for either things to go wrong or for people use the tools in the wrong way. Germ-line (i.e. modification of the egg cell) therapy is very controversial for example. This is because genes that appear to have no effect other than switching on or off other genes on the same chromosome that are tampered with could cause unpredictable problems in future generations. There are other problems associated with the fact that it is very difficult to predict the outcome of genetically engineered solutions. For example a new gene might cause a harmless organism to become pathogenic, if such as organism found its way into the environment it could have disastrous consequences. Likewise because bacteria can freely exchange genetic material the recombinant DNA used may become tranferred into other organisms including the antibiotic resistant marker genes. If this genetic material were to make it into pathogens it could be 'bad news'. Ampicillin resistance is used as a genetic marker because it is not nearly the most dangerous resistance that could 'escape' into the environment. Despite this the gene usage in the EU is heavily regulated along with others. The EU has very tough GMO regulatios in comparison with the U.S.
