There are many diseases which are caused by problems with genes or alleles. There is research into ways that these can be treated. The topic is called gene therapy. The aim of which is to replace the defective genes in the patients body with copies taken from healthy individuals. Currently some methods of gene therapy have been approved - primarily targeting cancer (60%+) whilst the remainder treat genetic disorders.

The hurdle that gene therapy has to overcome in order to be successful is development of a gene delivery system. Such a system must have a way of inserting normal genes into a patients cells and then ensure that these genes function correctly. Currently viruses are used as the primary vector for carrying the new DNA to the correct cells. The viruses (or a different vector) then inject the naked plasma DNA or make use of liposomes to insert the DNA into the cell.

Generally speaking gene therapies can be broadly categorised into two groups, germ line and somatic cell therapy. Both forms of therapy simply introduce the new DNA to the cell rather than remove the defective genes. This means that both correct and bad polypeptides are produced at the same time. Germ line therapy concerns 'germ line' cells. These are the cells that form the egg and as a result the genetic changes made will be inheritable. Somatic cell therapy on the other hand targets the cells in the affected tissue so the changes are not heritable. Sometimes stem cells are used instead of mature somatic cells which can have longer lasting therapeutic results but is also non heritable.
