In order to test for gene mutations scientists obtain DNA samples from a number of patient or patients and scan the sample for mutated genes. A gene probe (a short section of DNA whose sequence is the complement of the strand that is to be looked for) is used for this because they seek their complement from the three billion pairs that make up an individuals genome. Should the mutation be found the probe binds to it and 'flags' the mutation to scientists.

There is another method that can be used for DNA testing. It involves comparing the DNA sequence from the patient to a known normal version of the gene. Because these tests can take time and labour that varies with the size of the genes and the number of mutations which have to be tested against these tests are often expensive.

Genetic testing is used in a wide variety of scenarios.

* Pre-natal diagnostics and newborn babdy testing (e.g. Hereditary conditions)
* Carrier screening
* Pre-symptomatic testing for adult onset deseases (e.g. Huntingtons) and predicting risk of onset (e.g. Alzheimers)
* Forensic testing (e.g. Identity, paternity etc)

Knowing the results of a genetic test can have wide reaching consequences on the way an individual chooses to live their life. For example if you have been been tested as a carrier for cystic fibrosis and the test comes back positive you might choose not to have children in case they become a sufferer. Alternatively you might choose to abort a child if an antenatal test showed it could suffer from a desease like this.

There are both pros and cons to gene testing. The pros are that it can be used to clarify doctors diagnosis and so allow for better targeted treatment of symptoms. Gene tests have been comercialised such as those for adult onset disorders like alzheimers and some cancers. These tests are targeted at health people before the express the symptoms of the ilness (presymptomatic) if they have the disease at all. They are most likely tested becayse they have been marked as high risk as a result of their familly medical history. Most of the debate over gene testing is over these kinds of test. This is in part because the tests only give a probability that the individual might develop the disorder. In some cases a positively tested individual may never develop the illness making it hard to interpret a positive result. Scientists use information like this to determine the likelihood of someone developing the condition and also to make deductions about the condition. For example scientists now think that some desease causing mutations only express the desease in combination with other mutations and environmental factors.

The 'cons' of testing include the limitations of lab testing during which mistakes can occur. Laboratory errors might occur due to mis-labeling samplesm chemical contamination or a number of other reasons. Further the uncertainty in the test result interpretation and lack of availiable medical options means that the tests often provoke anxiety or cause distress for a number of individuals as well as social stigmatisation and discrimination that can occur after testing.

Along with these there are a number of social concerns that include: who gets access to the personal genetic information and who gets to use it. For example there are concerns around insurance companies getting hold of genetic information because it could affect their decision to ensure you for e.g. in life insurance or medical insurance (for countries like the US where medical care is not provided by the state). There are also questions about wether parents have the right to get their child tested for deseases that may affect them in their adult lives and who owns genetic information.

The biggest question of them all though - Will we one day produce human clones??