GMO is an abbreviation for genetically modified organisms and includes GM crops as well as animals and microorganisms. GM crops are perhaps the most common GMOs because of the relative lack of ethical issues surrounding their use in experiments. On the whole the GM crops have a 'bad name' which has resulted in many retailers banning GM ingredients from their products, you would find it difficult to find GM ingredients in UK supermarkets and indeed in the EU. As mentioned elsewhere low public confidence in GM has lead to the EU being one of the toughest places to produce GM crops. In fact only one crop MON 810, a maize plant, is licensed for human consumption in the EU currently. The only other to receive licence was Amflora, a potato that failed due to lack of demand.

Outside the EU however there are a wide range of genetically modified or transgenic crops. Transgenic means that the organism contains genes from another species. Soy beans are one example. In many countries the soya bean (of soy sauce fame) is of extreme importance as a food source. In some countries around 60% or more of foods are soy based e.g. soy milk, bread, biscuits etc. Some soya bean comes from GM soya crops which have been modified to be resistant to weed killer. This allows the soy crop to survive in situations where weed killer is relied on to kill weeds that would otherwise reduce crop yield. The weed killer ends up as broken down compounds in the soil.

Tomatoes are another plant which have been genetically modified, the 'Flavr Savr' strain of tomatoes has been modified to keep them firm for display in supermarkets after long distance travel. These tomatoes also have a longer shelf life and notably better taste. Flavr Savr tomatoes have a gene whose base pairs are complementary to the enzyme that ripens tomatoes through breakdown of pectin in their cell walls. The enzyme is not produced because when the mRNA for both genes is produced they combine to form a double strand which cannot be translated and so the polypeptide chain and later protein cannot be made.

The process by which GM crops are produced is relatively 'natural' taking advantage of a naturally occurring bacteria which contains a plasmid that it copies into trees to cause tumours (crown gall disease). This natural ability to copy its own DNA into that of the tree has been exploited by scientists who want to insert their own plasmids into plants. The species most used for this task is Agrobacterium tumefaciens which is now called Rhizobium radiobacter.

GM crops and GMOs in general have massive potential in terms of solving food shortages, improving food quality and flavour, reducing the environmental impact of farming and disease resistance. There are several reasons though why one would be opposed to GM crops including concerns that organic crops will be contaminated with GM pollen, GM pollen transfer to wild plants (although some biotech companies have planned to and patented forcing sterility in GM crops) and antibiotic or herbicide resistance developing in unwanted organisms. The sterile seed idea was not fully developed because of anti-GM backlash from concerns that it means that farmers would have to buy new seeds each year. Giving a monopoly on plant breeding to biotech companies and reducing crop diversity.
