In vitro is Latin for in glass and refers to experiments especially in biology which occur in petri dishes or test tubes which are often made of glass.

In vitro also refers to the fertilisation technique used to assist couples who want children but are 'infertile' here the definition of infertile is unable to conceive a child after 12 months of trying. It doesn't meant that it would be impossible for the couple to conceive a child but in some cases that may be the case. In the UK 50% of fertility issued are related to the female reproductive system and only 35% of the issues are linked to the male reproductive system. The remaining issues are not attributable. The number of couples seeking fertility treatment has seen a sharp uptake in the last 30 years.

In general IVF (in vitro fertilisation) is carried out as follows. In order to stimulate ovulation the female is injected with hormones of a specifically calculated dosage that aims to cause multiple follicles to develop. The oocytes that develop are collected from the female via a tube that is inserted into the oviducts, this operation is often carried out with the aid of an ultrasound. Male semen is also collected at the same time and stored in a liquid with nutrients to keep the sperm nourished. The oocytes are then separated, one per dish onto a number of petri dishes. Once in place on the dish the sperm can either be injected directly into the egg - a difficult task or the sperm can be added to the dish also in the hundreds of thousands in the hope that one sperm will fertilise the egg as under normal fertilisation conditions.

The eggs are checked frequently and three days after fertilisation is supposed to have occurred those which have successfully fertilised are filtered to find the two best eggs which are selected for the best chance of implantation and inserted into the uterus using a tube. This is why IVF patients often give birth to twins.