The technique by which cells are grown in laboratory conditions are called tissue culture. Tissue culture is carried out in vitro and allows cells from young animals or cancer cells to divide under observation. These cells are used instead of adult cells because most (though not all) adult cells retain the ability to differentiate since they are already differentiated (specialised for a specific purpose such as sweeping dust from our airways).

To grow cells in vitro the conditions have to be exactly right and correctly controlled. Controlled conditions range from osmotic potential to temperature and pH. Cells grown in tissue culture are able to become mature cells of the same type from which the culture was made whilst staying genetically identical to the parent cell. Tissue engineering is a slight tweak to this concept in which the cells are induced to grow in a synthetic mesh like framework which nudges the cells into growing the correct way for example the cells might need to be grown spread in a thin layer for later use as skin. Artificial skin produced in this way is used in place of skin grafts in some cases.

Tissue engineering can also be used to repair other organs but relies on stem cells. The source of these cells, or rather the best source is very early stage embryos though they can also be taken from the bone marrow of adults. It is the source of these cells that raises ethical concerns despite the massive potential for the technology e.g. generating organs that wound be rejected by the recipients immune system. Stems cells are made to differentiate into the required cells by adding the appropriate growth factors or hormones to the culture of cells. The cells are initially taken from the patient and have their nucleus removed, this nucleus is inserted into a human ovum which has also had its nucleus removed - though as with other animal cloning other cell organelles remain. This ovum is the cell that divides to form the ball of stem cells which can then be used for any number of purposes.