When two objects collide they way in which they behave is dependant on two things, their velocity
and their masses. Isaac Newton realised that a force is required in order to change the velocuty
of an object, he also realised the affect mass had as well. As a result of this he defined 
momentum, the momentum of a moving object being equal to its mass multiplied by its velocity.

The unit for momentum is Killogramms per metre, often the greek letter Rho which looks like a
lowercase p is used to denote momentum. Like velocity momentum is a vector rather than a scalar
quantity, it shares the same direction as velocity.

Newtons stated several laws of motion which apply universally. The first is that an object remains
at rest or in uniform motion unless acted upon by a force. This law simply says that a force is
needed to modify an objects momentum. From this law we can also determine that if the mass of an
object remains constant and so does its momentum then its velocity is also constant. Newtons second
law is that the rate of change of an object's momentum is proportional to the resultant force
acting on an object. Generally this is the same as the equation Force equals mass times accelaration
but more precisely it says that the force is proportional to the change of momentum devided by the
time taken for the change (delta rho devided by delta t). This relationship may also appear in the
form F=kma where K is the constant of proportionality. For K to equal one the newton is defined
such that one newton is equal to the force required to give an object of mass one kilogram the
acceleration one metre per second.

Forces also have an impulse which is the force multiplied by the time over which the force is 
acting, this is equal to the change of momentum of the object.

Force against time can be plotted on a graph, the area under which would equal the impulse of the
force. Impulse is measured in Newton seconds.
Newtons ideas are hundreds of years old but still provide the mathematical rules needed to predict
the motion of objects (apart from within the atom). In fact Einsteins relativity theories simplify
into Newtons laws.