Fertilisation is the point at whcih the male and female gametes fuse together and produce a zygote. For plants to undergo fertilisation a number of steps must happen. This is because the ovule - that is the female gamete is protected by the ovary which means that the male gamete can only come into contact with the female nucleus through a pollen tube. The male gamete is the nucleus that is present inside the pollen grain.

Fertilisation begins with a pollen grain landing on the stigma. The pollen grain has to be 'compatable' with the plant for fertilisation to occur. This prevents plant hybrids from being produced. Once the pollen has landed on the stigma it germinates in a sugary solution that has been produced by the stigma. When the pollen grain germinates it produces a pollen tube which grows downwards as a result of chemotropism. Chemotropism is the growth of organisms dictated by a chemical stimulus. In the case of the pollen tube the response is positive because the pollen tube grows towards the stimulus - in this case the ovary. As the pollen tube grows down it releases enzymes which digest the style allowing the pollen tube to pass through whilst also providing it with some nutrients.

At the tip of the pollen tube is the pollen tube nucleus followed by the male nuclie (of which there are two). The pollen tube eventually reaches the integuments and grows through a gap in them caled the micropyle. At this point the pollen tube comes into contact with the embryo sac so the pollen tube nucleus disintegrates. The two male nuclei are then released into the embryo sac 
