Self-pollination is analogous to in-breeding. As such it shared many of the same disadvantages. These disadvantages include reduction in variation and the size of the gene pool for a given species. Another more serious disadvantage is that two undesirable recessive alleles have greater chance of being paired in fertilisation if self-pollination occurs.

Conversely however self-pollination can help to preserve good genomes so is possibly more suitable if the environment that the plant currently inhabits is a stable one.

Flowers are adapted to cross pollinate through one of two methods. These methods are: insect pollination or wind pollination. Insect pollinated flowers often have colourful petals with scent to attract insects. Such flowers may also produce nectar from their nectaries in order to attract insects such as bees which feed upon it. Bees feed on sugary nectar and are adapted to do so - having long tongues so that they can reach the base of the flower where the nectar is located. When a bee enters the flower it also comes into contact with the male part. The anthers which brush against the bee leaving pollen behind - this pollen is the brushed off against a stigma of another flower when the bee enters it. The other method of cross pollination is wind pollination. Wind pollinated flowers have anthers that hang outside the flower as opposed to inside so that the wind can carry the pollen away. Wind pollinated flowers produce (large quantities of) pollen adapted for this purpose - the pollen is smooth and light so that it is easily picked up by the wind. The anthers of wind pollinated plants can also be found outside of the flower. The stigmas are feathery so that they have a large surface area for 'catching' the pollen grains that are inevitably blown into them.

Each type of pollination leads to an equivalent fertilisation i.e. self/cross pollinated => self/cross fertilised.

Though self pollinated species display less variation than cross pollinated species variation does still occur. This variations arise from the random assortment as well as 'crossing over' processes that occur during meiosis. Mutation may also add variation to a self fertilised species of plants. Together this means that out-breeding becomes of greater evolutionary importance as some genomes will be successfully whilst others will not.
