Plant seeds such as those of the broad bean (Vicia faba) can lie dormant for prolonged periods of time. Plants which lie dormant do not germinate until such point as environmental conditions become favourable for the survival of the plant. The priamry requirements for a successfull germination are Water, Oxygen and an appropritate temperature. Water is required so that enzymes can be mobilised and other nutrients can be transported as well as for vacuolation of cells. Vacuolation is the process by which plant cells become filled with vacuoles. The Oxygen is important because it is sued in respiration the product of which (ATP) is used as the energy supply for growth and other metabolic reactions. Appropriate temperatures for germination varies between different plant species but is always optimal when it matches the optimum temperature of the enzymes that take part in germination.

During germination the seeds food sources are mobilised but they cannot be transported in the seedling because they are insoluable in water. As a result of this the plant food sources are first broken down into simple but soluable substances which can be transported to the growing apices of the plumule (young shoot) and radicle (young root) through a water medium. Because of this vast requirement for water the seed takes water up very quickly in the first steps of germination. This results in the plant tissues swelling. The radicle and pumule of the plant grow in opposite directions, the radicle beginiing its growth first and forcing its way through the seed coat which ruptures to allow it through.

Though there are a large number of enzymes which are used in germination amylase an enzyme also found in human saliva plays a key role. That role is the hydrolysis of starch to form maltose which can be trasported to the apices (growing points) of the young plant. This is an important supply of 'food' whilst the plant remains underground - for the broad bean the cotelydons remain underground through germination. The plant can only begin to make its own food when the plumule emerges from the soil and unfurls (the pluule is originally bent over to protect it from soil abrasion) to gather light for photosyntehsis, by this time the food source that originally was stored in the cotelydons will have been depleted.
