The energy flow through an ecosystem begins with producers. These are green plants which take the energy from the sun (through photosytnthesis) and build sugars using that energy. The source of all the energy in the system is the sun, the energy is simply passed up trophic levels through the ecosystem.

Primary consumers are those which feed on the producers, these are Herbivores since they are animals that feed on plants. Secondary and tertiary consumers (and higher) are Carnivores, eating the animals below them in the chain. These groups are referred to as trophic levels as biological material is eaten the energy contained therein is passed on the the consumer. To get out of the system the energy must leave as heat. This happens at each trophic level where a large loss in energy occurs. The energy is primarily lost through respiration and through the excretion of various uneeded waste products e.g. Urea. Since energy is lost at each level the ultimate length of the food chain is limited. Usually the food chain is limited to around 4 levels, Producer -> Primary Consumer -> Seconday Consumer -> Tertiary Consumer.

Each level involves the 'building in' of some of the energy into the organic molecules of the organism at that level. On death thses organic molecules still remain in the organism along with the energy they contain. To release this energy decompsers are detriteivores which behave as saprobionts recylcle the nutrients and release the energy into the environment.

Decomposers are microbes ausch as fungi which take their nutrients for faeces and dead organisms e.g. Trees. Before decomposers can work on decomposition, larger organisms like earthworms feed on detritus (they are Detriteivores) to decompose it. This detritus is made up of abiotic (non-living) material like faeces, dead organisms and the fallen leaves from trees.

Diagrams can be used to represent this flow of energy through the ecosystem. There are several types of diagram (pyramids of biomass etc) - primarily however pyramids of energy are used. A pyramid of energy is a diagram which shows the amount of energy which is transferred between each trophic level, travelling up the pyramid. The energy transferred is given as per metre sqaured per unit time as such it represents the total energy requirement of the next trophic level in the chain.

The pyramid is formed from the size of the bars decreases at each level due to energy loss the pyramid can never be 'upside down' because energy is only lost at each level not added. When comparing comunities energy pyramids can also prove useful to compare how efficiently energy is transferred between the different comunities in the ecosystem.
