The light independant phase of photosynthesis involves several sub-processes. Photolysis - which is
the splitting of water molecules using energy from photons (light) to produce hydrogen ions and
electrons. The reduction of NADP into reduced NADP (NADPH) and finally the synthesis of ATP from ADP
and inorganic phosphate as in respiration. Since plants make use of light energy in this process the
type of phosphorylation is photophosphorylation.

The process starts when photons of light hit a photosystem they pass down to the primary pigment,
chlorophyll a. The energy from the photon excites electrons in the molecule of chlorophyll causing
them to gain energy and move to a higher energy level. This creates a movement of electrons which
can be described as the Z-scheme because the wasy the electrons change energy levels can be drawn as
a sideways Z. The ATP produced by this process is made in one of two ways much like there is aerobic
and anaerobic respiration in photosythesis there is cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation. It
is non-cyclic photophosphorylation which usually occurs.

Non-cyclic photophosphorylation involves both photosystem one and photosystem two. Photosystem two
absorbs the photons first, the photons pass down the antenna complex to the reaction centre. This
excites two electrons form chlorophyll a into a high energy state. This allows them to be picked up
by electron acceptors, these electrons then get passed along a chain to electron carriers to
photosystem one. On the way to photosystem one they also pass through a proton pump passing some of
their energy to the pump as well as losing energy to each electron acceptor. The energy lost by the
electrons along this chain is used to synthesise ATP from ADP. Photosystem one also absorbes some
photons of light - again causing the excitement of two electrons into a higher energy state and
allowing them to be accepted by another electron acceptor. Because photosytem two lost electrons at
the start of the process the molecule of chlorophyll a in its reaction centre is now unstable, in
order to restabalise the molecule electrons from photolysis (the splitting of water) are used.
Photolysis casuses water to be split into hydrogen, oxygen and elecrons.

The electron acceptor which receieved electrons from photosystem one releases some of its electrons
to the Hydrogen ions which are found outside the thylakoid membrane. This alows them to join with
NADP to form reduced NADP. These electrons never return to a molecule of chlorophyll so the system
is non-cyclic.

Cyclic phosphorylation on the other hand only makes used of photosystem one. As in non-cyclic
photophosphorylation th light energy is absorbed by the photosystem and passed to the chlorphyll a
at the reaction centre. The second electron acceptor again accepts the high energy electrons created
as a result of this, the electrons which are not used to produced reduced NADP by passing them to
Hydrogen ions outside the thylakoid membrane are returned to photosystem one by passing along a
chain of elctron acceptors. The energy generated as a result of this 'passing around' of electrons
is used to synthesise ATP.

Note though that cyclic photophosphorylation does not produced reduced NADP.

All the reactions of the light dependant phase of photosynthesis occur within the thylakoid membrane
of the chloroplast. As the elctrons are moving from one photosystem to another they pass though a
proton pump which pumps protons from within the stroma across the membrane and into the thylakoid
space. Like in respiration this creates an electrochemical gradient because of the build up of
hydrogen ions in the thylakoid space. This electrochemical gradient forces hydrogen ions to diffuse
back across the membrane through protein channels which provides energy to the ATP synthase to
produce ATP from ADP and phosphate. The ATP as well as the NADP that is produced in this phase is
used later on in the light dependant phase also.
