Different animals produce different types of nitrogenous waste and so have different waste disposal mechanisms. The animals environment has a large role in the type of nitrogenous waste that is produced. For example aquatic organisms such as fish produce ammonio which is higly toxic to us and also to fish however since fish are surrounded by water the ammonia can diffuse out of the fish across the gills where it is quickly diluted to a safe level.

Birds and insects on the other hand excreate uric acid which is amost entirely insoluable. It is also non-toxic unlike ammonia and urea. It does however have a large energy 'cost' associated with the process which produces it. The advantage to the bird is that litle to no water is required for it to be excreted. This is important as it means that the animal can survive in dry environments and conserve water. For birds it also makes them lighter as the have to carry less heavy water around.

Mammals such as ourselves excrete urea in our urine. To produce urea does require energy but not as much as that which is required to produce uric acid. It is also less toxic than the ammonia which fish produce and so it can be kept in our tissues in higher concentrations albeit for only short periods of time.

In order for mammals to live in deserts and other arid conditions they have adapted to have the loop of Henle which has a large role in water absorption (see reabsorption in earlier in this section). The longer a mammals loop of Henle the greater the solute concentration that can build up in the medula and also the greater amount of water that can be reabsorbed. The result is highly concentrated urine. Some mammals like the kangaroo rat have particularly long loops of Henle. 

To survive with little or even no water some animals must depend upon metabolic water. This metabolic water is produced by the breakdown of food reserves during respiration. Alonside this desert animals live underground during the day, their burrows are cool and humid so they lose less water through evaporation.
