Osmoregulation is the homeostatic control of body water. Like most of the processes involved in homoeostasis osmoregulation relies an a system of negative feedback. There are several components to the system, the first is the receptors responsible for detecting the change in water level - these are located in the hypothalamus at the base of the brain. Second is the posterior lobe of the pituitary which acts as the co-ordinator of the system and thirdly the collecting ducts of the kidneys which are the effectors; acting to change the water level.

Like the walls of the distal convoluted tubule the permeability of the collecting ducts can also be controlled by hormones. This hormone control alongside the build up of hypertonic (interstitial) fluids in the medulla from the loop of Henle is the factor which controls whether or not the body releases hypertonic or hypotonic urine.

ADH is the hormone which controls the permeability of the collecting duct walls. It makes the walls permeable so that water is reabsorbed. The result of this is that the urine has a concentration which is similar to that of other body fluids, i.e. it is hypertonic to them. Water reabsorption is controlled by a feedback system, negative feedback acts to restore the normal osmotic concentration should the blood become more diluted or similarly if it becomes more concentrated.

There are several things that may cause a drop in the water potential of blood, excessive sweating, high salt intake and reduced water consumption. The level of salt (sodium chloride) in the blood is an indication of the volume of water in the body, it it this that the hypothalamus is sensitive to. If the water level in the blood is low osmotic receptors detect the drop in water potential which triggers nerve impulses which travel to the posterior pituitary gland. As a result of the nerve impulses the gland releases ADH into the blood. The ADH increases the distal convoluted tubule's and the collecting duct's permeability to water. This increase in permeability means more water is reabsorbed from these tubules into the region of high solute concentration found in the medulla from where it is reabsorbed into the blood such that the small volume of urine eventually released is concentrated.
