Of all the materials which were originally removed from the blood through ultrafiltration only all of the glucose is reabsorbed most of the salts and water are also reabsorbed into the blood. What is left over is urine which passes to the bladder. 

This process occurs as the glomerular filtrate flows through the nephron. The glucose and water are reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule though a small amount of water is also reabsorbed in the distal convoluted tubule along with some salts. Any remaining water is absorbed by the collecting duct in a process with the loop of Henle. Glucose and salts are reabsorbed by active transport whilst the water is passively absorbed by osmosis after the salt is removed.

The purpose of the loop of Henle is to collectively concentrate salts in the medula of the kidney, specifically within the tissue fluid. This high concentration of salt then causes an osmotic flow of water which passes from the collecting ducts. This acts to concentrate the urine and make it hypertonic in comparison with the blood. The loop of Henle works on a principle known as the hair-pin counter-current multiplier. As the fluid flows through the ascending limb of the loop sodium and chlorine ions are pumped from the limb to the surrounding medula thereby creating a low water potential at the apex of the loop. Because the ascending limp is impmermeable to water relative to the descending limb water leaves the glomerular filtrate from the descending limb at which point it is taken away by blood in the vasa recta. This causes the fluid in the descending limb to become more and more concentrated and the fluid flowing through the ascending limb to become more and more dilute. Altogether the large number of loops create a region of low water potential in the medula so that as the collecting ducts carrying urine pass through the medulla water passes out through osmosis allowing the counter current mechanism to act as a fine control for osmoregulation.

In the proximal convoluted tubule the cells are adapted for absorbtion by having microvilli and a large number of mitochondria. The large number of mitochndria are required to provide ATP (from respiration which takes place within the mitochondrion) for active transport whilst the microvilli create a large surface area over which absorbtion can take place.
