Ultrafiltration is the process that occurs in the kidneys to remove small soluble molecules from blood plasma. It occurs under high pressure, hence the name ultrafiltration. Through ultrafiltration water, glucose, urea and various salts pass from the capillaries in the glomerulus to the Bowman's capsule. This fluid is known as glomerular filtrate or primary urine. From the Bowman's capsule the fluid passes through the proximal convoluted tubule and the loop on Henle, through the distal convoluted tubule into the collecting duct. By the time the fluid reaches the collecting duct it is no longer glomerular filtrate, it is urine. 

The blood which enters the glomerulus is separated from the Bowman's capsule by a basement membrane through which only small molecules can pass - leaving large plasma proteins in the blood plasma. Proteins do however sometimes appear in urine - this is a symptom of high blood pressure as the pressure can force the large plasma proteins through the basement membrane. Damage to the basement membrane can also allow red blood cells into urine though it is more likely that the blood entered the urine from somewhere else.

The glomerulus is 'designed' specifically for ultrafiltration to take place. With the basement membrane acting as a 'sieve' between the capillaries and the nephron and two cell layers. The first cell layer is the actual wall of the capillary within which there are a number of small gaps then there is the basement membrane which is sandwiched between the first layer and another layer which makes up the wall of the Bowman's capsule - this layer also has special epithelial cells known as podocytes.

The pressure that allows ultrafiltration to happen is primarily supplied by the hydrostatic pressure of the blood in the capillaries of the glomerulus. This pressure is increased due to the small diameter of the efferent arteriole and also due to the water potential of the blood due to the colloidal plasma proteins. This means that the pressure within the glomerulus can be varied by varying the diameter of either of the efferent or afferent arterioles.
