Artificial selection is also known as selective breeding makes use of the natural variations that occur within a population to produce the best organisms possible. Humans often choose animals with the best characteristics to breed from in order to maximise profit etc. This means that instead of the environment dictating the alleles which occur in future generations we do instead. Artificial selection mimics natural selection but happens at an accelerated rate. It can lead to very distinct breeds forming such as in dogs and many plants.

Although artificial selection does occur at an increased rate it can still take many years to produce organisms which have the desired characteristics. These organisms are of the same species as their relatives but are often called breeds in animals and varieties in plants.

Artificial selection can occur in one of two ways. The first is through inbreeding. Inbreeding occurs when the gametes of close relatives fuse. It has a number of disadvantages which mean that occasionally it becomes necessary to introduce new genes through outbreeding. The disadvantage of inbreeding is called inbreeding depression. Inbreeding depression occurs because inbreeding favours homozygosity. Homozygosity means that the chance of a recessive allele expressing itself through a double recessive individual increases. Outbreeding which is also used to 'undo' some of the damage caused by inbreeding occurs when unrelated varieties or breeds are crossed. Unlike inbreeding outbreeding favours heterozygosity. Hybrid vigour or heterosis in which organisms have improved function in a hybrid offspring is caused by outbreeding. This occurs when new chromosomes are introduced which are complementary in their effects - one example of this is modern wheat development.