A biofuel is any fuel which has a biological origin. This includes ethanol as well as diesel which has been made from corn, sugarcane and rapeseed along with other crops, wood, wood shavings or clippings, biogas (aka methane from animal excrement) and so on.

Ethanol is a good example of a biofuel because it is made through fermentation in the same way that beer is produced it is though usually mixed with petrol before use - reducing its environmental friendliness. Oilseed rape or Rapeseed (Brassica napus) is a member of the mustard family and is known for its oil rich seeds and is largely the source of the worlds vegetable oil. Biodiesal is an oil substitute made from this plant which can be used on its own or mixed with other chemicals for use as fuel. Biogas which is primarily methane is often used in small scale power generators rather than directly as fuel.

Biofuels are said to be 'climate friendly' as they are supposed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in comparison with traditional fossil fuels which; when burnt produce carbon dioxide which traps heat in the atmosphere thereby contributing to global warming. The primary way that they work to reduce emissions are through reduction in carbon dioxide emissions but also through the growing of the crops which are used to produce the fuels in the first place which take some of the carbon dioxide n out of the air through photosynthesis. Biofuels however are not entirely biologically friendly because they require farming, processing and other treatment which can make them as polluting as their petroleum based counterparts.

Currently the country that produces and uses the largest amount of biofuel is brazil. The sugarcane industry is big in the country - producing 16 billion litres of ethanol per year. Most new cars in the country now run on an 85% ethonol mix. There is a problem with biodiversity in countries which depend on and produce large amounts of biofuel. Like much of the UK and other western countries farmland, to produce large amounts of biofuel fields of monocultures are used which can reduce the habitat availiable to native plant and animal species e.g. in some Asian countries it has been considered that rainforests be chopped down to make way for palm oil plantations. Crops such as corn or soy being used in biofuel can increase the cost to consumers buying the crop for eating thereby reducing food supply to less prosperous regions.

There are barriers to biofuel production however. Current engines can cope with the new fuels genenerally speaking - plant productuon is a limiting factor. This is because only a small part of the plant can be used. Plants have cellulose cell walls which have to be broken down before fermentation (in the case of ethonol production). Work is currently being done to create 'second generation' biofuels which will make use of or process the cellulse making production more efficient and allowing a wider range of plants and plant waste to be used.

Because of current problems with biofuel production opposers to biofuel often cast doubt on the climate benefit of biofuels. Instead they say that priority should be given to cutting energy use rather than run financial initiatives for biofuel producers - the farmers.