Human activity also impacts the carbon cycle. In recent years (the last century) there has been a dramatic rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. This increase has been largely attributed to fossil fuel combustion. In all this accounts for 70% of the carbon dioxide increase in the last 50 years with 76% of the carbon dioxide from industrial countries. Deforestation accounts for the remaining 30% increase in carbon dioxide levels. 50% of the worlds forest have been removed in under 30 years. Forests are important because they maintain the carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere by using it in photosynthesis, replacing it with oxygen. It is important that carbon dioxide and oxygen levels in the atmosphere are balanced because carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas. Like the other greenhouse gases: methane and CFC's it absorbs heat reflected from the earths surface and prevents it from escaping into space thereby raising the temperature of the earth at the surface. This is the cause of global warming.

Global warming leads to changes in climate including changes in patterns of rainfall and rises in the level of seas. See level rises are caused by the melting of polar icecaps which can lead to increased flooding in coastal or low lying areas. Forest fires, cyclones (and tropical cyclones aka hurricanes) as well as prolonged drought can also be caused by climate changes resulting from global warming. In terms of drought in same places around the world deserts may form due to the decreased water availability. It is possible to refer to the increased crop yields as an upside to global warming but scientists have suggested that this may increase insect pest populations as well. Crop yields will also fall elsewhere. Grain crops in north America and some Asian countries would be reduced with economic consequences.

In a bid to fight global warming ongoing genetic engineering research is being carried out to develop drought resistant crops. Already this research has determined the gene which controls water efficiency in plants but it will require many more years of research before the ideas are developed enough that drought resistant crops become a reality.