Fertiliser use in farming also has an impact on the environment. Developed agriculture is intensive, producing more and more crops from smaller areas of land. To achieve this fertilisers containing nitrate are used. These fertilisers have a detrimental affect on both terrestrial and aquatic organisms.

The effects of the fertiliser use are due to excess nitrate in the soil. The excess fertiliser is used by plants such as grasses and nettles which grow taller and faster covering smaller plants so that they do not receive enough sunlight, In the long term this reduces species diversity. The excess nitrates can also run off into water bodies nearby or slowly leach into rivers along with phosphates. This causes a build up of salts in bodies of water until an equilibrium is reached. At this point the salts are removed at the same rate as they are added. Because sewage works and fertilisers carry large amounts of these salts (nitrates and phosphates) leaching results in eutrophication of lakes and rivers. It is easy for nitrates to enter water because they are highly soluble. Their build up causes algal blooms because of the excessive nutrients in the water. If this happens the water becomes densely populated with species of algae turning the surface green, preventing any light from penetrating deep into the water. This means that the plants in deeper water cannot photosynthesise and die out. This has a knock on effect in reducing the number of animal species because they rely in these plants for food and shelter. Algae however are short lived and die very quickly. They are decomposed by saprobionts bacteria in a process that requires lots of oxygen. This biochemical oxygen demand (sometimes written BOD) causes the water to become deoxygenated except very near to the surface. This results in fish and other animals which rely on the oxygen to die out also. More bacteria may reduce the nitrate to nitrite in the water during the final stages of eutrophication. Because both of these chemicals are toxic there is an EU wide limit of 11.3 parts per million of nitrogen in water which is suitable for humans to drink. Unfortunately this amount has been exceeded in the UK in some places.

There is further strict legislation aimed at stopping the high nitrate level problem. This includes forcing farmers to restrict the amount of fertiliser they use and the time when they use it so that it is only used when the crops are actively growing. Legislation also adds 10 metre clear strips by any watercourse and drainage ditches.