In recent times there has been a significant increase in the intensity of fishing. As a result commercial fishing has caused overfishing around the world.
Overfishing can be loosely defined as the rate of fishing exceeding the rate at which fish breed.

Commercial fishing takes a number of different forms. Drift netting for example is used to catch pelagic fish which inhabit the upper parts of the water. The size of the fish caught by this method is dependant on the size of the mesh of the net that is used. In some cases the fish caught are too small to sell but are dead before they are thrown back.

To catch mid and bottom feeder fish a different technique is used. This is called trawling. Unlike drift nets which are suspended between floats and boats trawl nets are dragged through the water. This has the unfortunate effect of 'catching' everything in the nets path. As with drift netting the mesh size of the trawl net is important and in most places closely regulated so as to prevent fishermen from catching younger fish which have not yet matured enough to reproduce and so maintain fish stocks.

Maintaining fish stocks isn't just important for sustaining aquatic ecosystems it is also important in maintaining the fishermen's livelihoods. With no fish to catch there wouldn't be any fishermen. To ensure that both are kept in balance i.e. there are enough fish to make a living with but also enough to replenish stocks a number of measures have been taken. These measures include restricting mesh size (as mentioned earlier) to reduce accidental catches, international agreements which place quotas on the size of catches as well as local quotas on catches based on the size of the current fish stock as estimated by scientists. exclusion zones and closed/open seasons. All of these methods require an amount of enforcement to be effective which can be costly.

Overfishing has effects on entire food chains if a particular species is overfished. Overfishing of organisms lower in the food chain reduces the population size of those further up. Krill (a small shrimp) are an example of this because they are positioned low in the food chain - feeding on phytoplankton. They convert the energy from these animals into a form suitable for other animals such as whales (whose diet consists primarily of krill), squid, seals, penguin and other fish. Krill are especially overfished in the Antarctic where they can be found in swarms which are miles across. From the 1980's onward Russia, South Korea, Poland, Ukraine, Chile, and Japan (6 countries) have been harvesting tons of krill impacting the whale population which has already been overexploited.

Rather than fishing in open waters some fish have become farmed. Perhaps surprisingly fish can grow very well in warm waters discharged from factories as well as in ponds, lakes and estuaries in which they live in enclosures. These enclosures are managed and have predators removed and food supplies maintained at an optimum level through the addition of artificial fertilisers which aid phytoplankton growth. These phytoplanton are later eaten by the fish which are being farmed.

Fish farming poses a number of problems. Most of these problems arise as a result of the way the fish stock are kept. Fish are often in cramped conditions very close together in order to make the most profit from as little space. This means that disease can easily spread between the fish and into wild fish populations. For this reason large amounts of antibiotics are added to the 'farm' to keep the fish healthy. Along with these pesticides are used (as with a conventional farm) to kill of fish parasites. Like the diseases these pesticides can spread from the farm and harm marine invertebrates. Fish excreta can also spread out into the surroundings from the warm and cause eutrophication. Eutrophication is the sudden growth of algae/cyanobacteria due to excessive richness of nutrients in the body of water.

On occasion the fish themselves may also escape from the farm. If this happens and the escaped fish breed with the wild stock the wild fish population can be weakened. Further in order to farm the fish (especially carnivorous fish like salmon) you have to have more fish in the first place - salmon eat 3 times their own weight in fish food. Since the fish food consists mainly of other fish this is not a good use of the environment. Today about half of the salmon sold worldwide comes from fish farms. Salmon however have a problem (both types, wild and farmed) they contain PCB's or polychlorinated biphenyls and high levels of dioxins. PCB's often come from the fish feed and are a persistent organic pollutant which has been shown to cause cancer and other illnesses in both other animals and humans. These chemicals build up in salmon because they are high in the food chain and also because they accumulate in fat. Seals are another marine animal effected by these chemicals.