Resistance is the ability of an organism to survive exposure to harmful chemicals such as poisons which in normal cases would result in the death of the organism. Examples of resistance developing are found among the rat population. Warfarin is an anticoagulant which has in the past been used as a large scale in a bid to keep rats of the species Rattus norvegicus numbers down.

Warfarin resistance is conferred to a rat by the domminant R allele. As well as making the rats resistant to warfarin it also makes the rat need vitamin K. RR (homozygous) rats require a large amount of vitamin K which is difficult for them to obtain. Rr (heterozygous) rats only have a small vitamin K requirement giving them the advantage over the homozygous rats and homozygous non resistant rats. In the absence of warfarin however RR (homozygous resistant) rats fare worse than non resistant rats (small rr). Because the heterozygous rats have the most advantage all three possible gametes Rr, rr, RR, being produced per generation.

Bacteria are also becoming increasingly resistant. MRSA is a methicillin resistant strain of the Staphylococcus aureus bateria which is resistant to penicliins like meticillin which are antibiotics. (meticillin is the British approved name and INN whilst methicillin is the US approved name). Resistance in bacteria arises by mutations occuring randomly in populations of bacteria which provide an advantage if the particular antibiotic is present e.g. in hospitals. Resistance can take a number of forms. The bacteria can produce enzymes which break down the antibiotic such as penicillinase which breaks down peniciillin. If penecillin is present in this cases the bacteria which produce the enzyme are favoured so survive to reproduce. This selection pressure is affected by both the quantity and frequency of the penicillin usage. Bacteria have developed a wide range of resistances through repeated exposure to antibiotics with resistant genes being passed on to each subsequent generation.

When bacteria sexually reproduce (conjugation) resistance can be passed between the organisms on plasmids. This can only occur between individuals which are members of the same species but it does mean that a pathogen can become resitant to a given antibiotic before it is used to fight them.

Resistance development is especially common in agriculture because farm reared animals which are kept indoors commonly spread diseases among them as a result of the confined space. To prevent this broad spectrum antibiotics are added to animal feed to prevent disease but in fact allows resistance to develop.