1 light year (symbol lyr) is the distance travelled by light in space in one normal year, 365 days. 1 light year is approximately 9.5e15 metres.

It can be determined how close a star is to us using the parallax effect. Parallax occurs because the line of sight to a nearby start changes in a six monthly cycle. By measuring the angluar shift in a stars position over six months relative to fixed stars the distance to nearby stars can be calculated using trigonometry.

Imagine a triangle between the earth sun and star. The base of the triangle is the mean distance between the earth and the sun equal to 1AU (astronomical unit) or around 1.5e11m. The parallax angle is the angle that is subtended by the star  to the line beteen earch and the sun. It is equal to half the angular shift measured over the six months. This value is always less than 10 degrees. This allows the small angle approximation that tan(θ) ≅ θ for angles in radians below this threshold (note: 10 degrees ≅ 0.175 radians). θ, the parallax angle is often measure in arc seconds because it is extremely small, 1 degree is 3600 arc seconds. As a result of this the distance d from the sun to the star (=1AU/θ) is often quoted in parsecs though this is not an SI unit. Parsecs have the symbol pc and are loosely defined such that 1 pc is equal to the distance to a start which subtends an angle of 1 arc second to the line between the center of earth and the centre of the sun. 1 pc is aprrox 3.26 light years. d = 1/θ if the measurement obtained is to be in parsecs.

To measure the parallax angles for nearby stars ground telescopes are used upto around 100pc at which point the atmospheric refraction makes it hard to get an accurate measurement. Instead after this point space telescopes are used.