Industrial fermentation is the process used to culture bacteria and fungi on a
large scale, such as in the production of antibiotics like penicillin. There are
several advantages for making use of microbes in the fermentation process.
Mainly it is because the microbes grow quickly and lower temperatures can be
used because enzymes do not have to be supplied which brings down cost.

A batch culture fermentation starts with a pure culture of the microorganism so
that a pure product is harvested at the end. A batch culture fermenter is
inoculated with the culture and the fermenter provides the suitable conditions
for growth without competition so that the process can operate at maximum
efficiency. As part of providing these ideal conditions forced aeration may also
be used. Forced aeration has the added benefit of mixing the mixture improving
the organism's contact with nutrients though this can also be done with a
dedicated mixer.

Numerous conditions such as temperature and pH are also monitored be
sophisticated monitors so that conditions can be controlled. For example air
inlets may have spargers which allow for improved aeration. The temperature is
also controlled by a water jacket which removes excess heat produced during the
entire process.

A good example of industrial fermentation is penicillin production. Penicillin
is a secondary metabolite produced by the fungus Penicillium notatum. The
Penicillium grows in the optimal conditions provided by the batch culture
fermenter and after around 30 hours penicillin is produced (it is not produced
immediately because it is a secondary metabolite) and the concentration of
penicillin in the medium increases. Approximately a week later the culture fluid
is extracted and then purified to give pure penicillin. The fermenter then has
to be re-sterilised so that it can be used again - hence it is called batch
fermentation.

Antibiotics are often secondary metabolites. They are produced when the organism
such as Penicillum's life cycle reaches the point where conditions begin to
change away from the optimum.

Continuous cultivation is the better method for collecting products which are
primary metabolites. This is because continuous cultivation allows for
production to continue for a longer period of time. This is the products.
Insulin is one product which is produced this way.


