Micro-ganisms are well known for their ability to reproduce quickly. In optimum
conditions bacteria can divide in two every twenty minutes. They can also be
grown in the Lab on a variety of mediums given the right conditions.

Different micro-organisms require different conditions to grow optimally but can
grow over a range of variables. In order to grow the conditions required
include:

- a suitable pH, bacteria prefer a pH or 7.4 which is slightly alkaline whilst
other micro-organisms like fungi prefer slightly acidic conditions.

- a suitable temperature, growth is normally regulated by a number of enzymes
which can be denatured by high temperatures or inhibited by cold temperatures.
The majority of bacteria grow in the temperature range of 25-45 degrees
centigrade whilst pathogens (disease causing micro-organisms) have an optimum of
37 degrees centigrade which just so happens to also be our body temperature!

- Nutrients - Nitrogen, carbon (as glucose usually), vitamins and mineral salts.
In a Lab setting the nutrients are often provided by the media in/on which the
bacteria are grown such as agar.

- Oxygen - Most micro-organisms are 'obligate aerobes' and require oxygen for
metabolism whilst others may grow better with oxygen but do not require it
(these are 'facultative anaerobes'). Some can not grow in Oxygen at all such as
*Clostridium* bacteria which is an 'obligate anaerobe'. *Clostridium* in fact
cause the condition moist gangrene by destroying body tissue as a result of
producing toxins in a wound.

Once the microorganisms have been growing for some time the size of the
microorganism population can be measured. This can be done either through a
indirect method such as the 'cloudiness' of a culture (in other words its
turbidity) or through a direct method such as a Total count or a Viable count.
Total counts include both living and dead bacterium whilst viable counts only
count the number of living 'viable' cells.

It is of course very difficult to count a large population of microorganisms so
the culture is diluted and the result of counting the small sample of cells is
multiplied to find the total population size. This gives a population density
measured in organisms per centimetre cubed. The dilution is called a serial
dilution - a serial dilution dilutes a culture by a factor of 10 each time.

Growth can be measured in many ways. One method is to make rough estimates by
measuring the diameter of the colony from a central point. Then there is serial
dilution (mentioned above), when a serial dilution is performed the assumption
is made that the separate colonies of bacteria originated from a single cell
through asexual reproduction. A more accurate method however is the
haemocytometer which uses a specialised microscope slide to give total cell
counts.
